url: https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/ashmore-and-cartier-islands/
Introduction: Background: Indonesian fishermen have long fished in the area around Ashmore Reef and Cartier Island. British explorers were the first Europeans to see Cartier Island and Ashmore Reef in 1800 and 1811, respectively. American whalers frequently sailed by the islands in the 1850s and later settled to mine the phosphate deposits on Ashmore Reef, which were exhausted by 1891. The UK disputed US access to Ashmore Reef and formally annexed it in 1878. Cartier Island was annexed in 1909. In 1931, the UK transferred the islands to Australia, which accepted them in 1934 as part of Western Australia. In 1938, Australia transferred governance to the Northern Territory. During World War II, Cartier Island was used as a bombing range. In 1978, governance of Ashmore and Cartier Islands was moved to the federal government. Ashmore Reef and Cartier Island became marine reserves in 1983 and 2000 respectively.In 1974, Australia and Indonesia signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to allow Indonesian fishermen to continue fishing around the islands. The MOU also allows Indonesian fishermen to visit the graves of past fishermen, replenish their fresh water, and shelter in the West Island Lagoon of Ashmore Reef. In the 1990s, Indonesia challenged Australia’s claim to the islands, which was settled in a maritime boundary treaty in 1997. The islands were a popular first point of contact for migrants and refugees seeking to enter Australia, so in 2001, Australia declared the islands to be outside the Australian migration zone.
Geography: Location: Southeastern Asia, islands in the Indian Ocean, midway between northwestern Australia and Timor island; Ashmore Reef is 840 km west of Darwin and 610 km north of Broome; Cartier Islet is 70 km east of Ashmore Reef
Geography: Geographic coordinates: 12 25 S, 123 20 E
Geography: Geographic coordinates - note: Ashmore Reef - 12 14 S, 123 05 E; Cartier Islet - 12 32 S, 123 32 E
Geography: Map references: Southeast Asia
Geography: Area - total: 5 sq km
Geography: Area - land: 5 sq km
Geography: Area - water: 0 sq km
Geography: Area - note: includes Ashmore Reef (West, Middle, and East Islets) and Cartier Island
Geography: Area - comparative: about eight times the size of the National Mall in Washington, DC
Geography: Land boundaries - total: 0 km
Geography: Coastline: 74.1 km
Geography: Maritime claims - territorial sea: 12 nm
Geography: Maritime claims - contiguous zone: 24 nm
Geography: Maritime claims - continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
Geography: Maritime claims - exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
Geography: Climate: tropical
Geography: Terrain: low with sand and coral
Geography: Elevation - highest point: Cartier Island 5 m
Geography: Elevation - lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
Geography: Natural resources: fish
Geography: Land use - agricultural land: 0% (2018 est.)
Geography: Natural hazards: surrounded by shoals and reefs that can pose maritime hazards
Geography: Geography - note: Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve established in August 1983; Cartier Island Marine Reserve established in 2000
People and Society: Population - total: (2021 est.) no indigenous inhabitants
People and Society: Population - note: Indonesian fishermen are allowed access to the lagoon and fresh water at Ashmore Reef's West Island; access to East and Middle Islands is by permit only
People and Society: Population growth rate: 0.32% (2021 est.)
Environment: Environment - current issues: illegal killing of protected wildlife by traditional Indonesian fisherman, as well as fishing by non-traditional Indonesian vessels, are ongoing problems; sea level rise, changes in sea temperature, and ocean acidification are concerns; marine debris
Environment: Climate: tropical
Environment: Land use - agricultural land: 0% (2018 est.)
Government: Country name - conventional long form: Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Government: Country name - conventional short form: Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Government: Country name - etymology: named after British Captain Samuel ASHMORE, who first sighted his namesake island in 1811, and after the ship Cartier, from which the second island was discovered in 1800
Government: Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from Canberra by the Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport
Government: Legal system: the laws of the Commonwealth of Australia and the laws of the Northern Territory of Australia, where applicable, apply
Government: Citizenship: see Australia
Government: Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)
Government: Diplomatic representation from the US - embassy: none (territory of Australia)
Government: Flag description: the flag of Australia is used
Military and Security: Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia
Transnational Issues: Illicit drugs: NA