url: https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/wake-island/
Introduction: Background: Early Micronesian and Polynesian settlers probably visited Wake Island, and oral legends tell of periodic voyages to the islands by people from the Marshall Islands. Wake Island was uninhabited when Spanish explorer Alvaro de Mendana de NEYRA became the first European to see it in 1568 and still had no inhabitants when English captain Samuel WAKE sailed by it in 1796. The United States Exploring Expedition visited the island in 1841, and the US annexed it in 1899 to use as a cable and refueling station for its newly acquired Pacific territories of Hawaii, the Philippines, and Guam. In the 1930s, Pan American Airways built facilities on Wake Island so that it could be used as a stopover for flights from the US to China. In 1941, the US began to install military assets on Wake Island, and Japan then captured the island and held it until the end of World War II. In 1946, commercial airlines resumed using Wake Island as a refueling stop. In 1973, the Marshall Islands claimed Wake Island, based on the oral legends, although the US has not recognized these claims. In 1974, the US military took exclusive control of the island’s airstrip and restricted visitors. In 1978, Bikini Islanders from the Marshall Islands, who were evacuated in the 1950s and 1960s because of US nuclear tests, considered rehoming on Wake Island, but the US military rejected that plan. Since the 1970s, the island has been important for missile defense testing. In 2009, Wake Island was included in the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument.
Geography: Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to the Northern Mariana Islands
Geography: Geographic coordinates: 19 17 N, 166 39 E
Geography: Map references: Oceania
Geography: Area - total: 7 sq km
Geography: Area - land: 6.5 sq km
Geography: Area - water: 0 sq km
Geography: Area - comparative: about 11 times the size of the National Mall in Washington, DC
Geography: Land boundaries - total: 0 km
Geography: Coastline: 19.3 km
Geography: Maritime claims - territorial sea: 12 nm
Geography: Maritime claims - exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
Geography: Climate: tropical
Geography: Terrain: atoll of three low coral islands, Peale, Wake, and Wilkes, built up on an underwater volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim
Geography: Elevation - highest point: unnamed location 8 m
Geography: Elevation - lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
Geography: Natural resources: none
Geography: Land use - agricultural land: 0% (2018 est.)
Geography: Land use - other: 100% (2018 est.)
Geography: Irrigated land: 0 sq km (2022)
Geography: Natural hazards: subject to occasional typhoons
Geography: Geography - note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean; emergency landing location for transpacific flights
People and Society: Population - total: (2018 est.) no indigenous inhabitants
People and Society: Population - note: approximately 100 military personnel and civilian contractors maintain and operate the airfield and communications facilities
Environment: Environment - current issues: potable water obtained through a catchment rainwater system and a desalinization plant for brackish ground water; hazardous wastes moved to an accumulation site for storage and eventual transport off site via barge
Environment: Climate: tropical
Environment: Land use - agricultural land: 0% (2018 est.)
Environment: Land use - other: 100% (2018 est.)
Government: Country name - conventional long form: none
Government: Country name - conventional short form: Wake Island
Government: Country name - etymology: although first discovered by British Captain William WAKE in 1792, the island is named after British Captain Samuel WAKE, who rediscovered the island in 1796
Government: Dependency status: unincorporated unorganized territory of the US; administered from Washington, DC, by the Department of the Interior; activities in the atoll are currently conducted by the 11th US Air Force and managed from Pacific Air Force Support Center
Government: Independence: none (territory of the US)
Government: Legal system: US common law
Government: Citizenship: see United States
Government: Flag description: the flag of the US is used
Energy: Electricity access - electrification - total population: 100% (2021)
Energy: Petroleum - refined petroleum consumption: 8,000 bbl/day (2022 est.)
Energy: Carbon dioxide emissions: 1.221 million metric tonnes of CO2 (2022 est.)
Energy: Carbon dioxide emissions - from petroleum and other liquids: 1.221 million metric tonnes of CO2 (2022 est.)
Energy: Energy consumption per capita: (2019)
Communications: Telecommunication systems - general assessment: satellite communications; 2 Defense Switched Network circuits off the Overseas Telephone System (OTS); located in the Hawaii area code - 808 (2018) (2018)
Communications: Broadcast media: American Armed Forces Radio and Television Service (AFRTS) provides satellite radio/TV broadcasts (2018)
Transportation: Airports: 1 (2024)
Transportation: Ports - total ports: 1 (2024)
Transportation: Ports - large: 0
Transportation: Ports - medium: 0
Transportation: Ports - small: 0
Transportation: Ports - very small: 1
Transportation: Ports - ports with oil terminals: 1
Transportation: Ports - key ports: Wake Island
Transportation: Transportation - note: there are no commercial or civilian flights to and from Wake Island, except in direct support of island missions; emergency landing is available
Military and Security: Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US; the island serves as a trans-Pacific refueling stop for military aircraft and supports US Missile Defense Agency (MDA) testing activities; the US Air Force is responsible for overall administration and operation of the island facilities while the launch support facility is administered by the MDA (2024)